feat(remote): implement native SSH orchestration (remote ssh) (#39378)
neovim/neovim: runtime/doc/remote_ssh.txt

*remote_ssh.txt*  Nvim

                            NVIM REFERENCE MANUAL

Remote SSH                                     *remote-ssh* *remote-ssh-plugin*

> Nvim allows orchestrating remote servers natively using SSH multiplexing.

Reviewer: this is rather buzzwordy. prefer active voice and say things clearly:

```suggestion
Nvim can connect to remote SSH servers.
```

Using the |:connect| command with an `ssh://` URI, Nvim will automatically
connect to a host, bootstrap itself, and connect the local UI to the remote
headless server.

                                      Type |gO| to see the table of contents.

==============================================================================
1. Introduction                                      *remote-ssh-introduction*

> The remote SSH engine uses `ssh` to communicate with the remote system. It:

Reviewer: we should probably call this the `remote-ssh` feature. we'll need a one-word nonce to avoid everyone constantly inventing their own nonce for it.

```suggestion
The remote-ssh feature uses `ssh` to connect to a remote system. It:
```

- Detects the remote architecture.
- Bootstraps the Nvim binary in `~/.local/bin/nvim` and `~/.local/share/nvim-remote`.

> - Starts the remote Nvim with `NVIM_APPNAME=nvim-remote`, keeping remote

Reviewer: nice 👍

  state separate from any local Nvim installation on the remote host.
- Initiates a headless Nvim server and connects your local UI via a Unix
  domain socket.

> - On teardown, kills the remote headless process and SSH mux socket, but

Reviewer: avoid buzzwords, use words that are intuitive for users. that doesn't mean to use incorrect words, it just means to prefer clarity where possible.

```suggestion
- On disconnect, kills the remote headless process and SSH mux socket, but
```

  leaves the persistent data directory (`~/.local/share/nvim-remote`) intact
  for fast reconnects.

==============================================================================

> 2. Usage                                                    *remote-ssh-usage*

Reviewer: this is rather verbose/redundant, i'll clean it up later

Author: I didn' touch it then.

From the command line: ~

Connect to a remote server using `-c` with |:connect|. Nvim will prompt for
a password if needed, but SSH keys are highly recommended.
>sh
    nvim -c 'connect ssh://user@192.168.1.100'
    nvim -c 'connect ssh://root@server:2222'
<

From a running Nvim session: ~

`:connect` ssh://{uri}

Connects to {uri} over SSH. The SSH engine bootstraps the remote host
and reconnects the local UI to the remote server.
>vim
    :connect ssh://user@192.168.1.100
    :connect ssh://root@server:2222
<

`:connect` {address}

Without the `ssh://` prefix, `:connect` connects to a local server at the
given address (e.g. a Unix socket path).

==============================================================================
3. Requirements                                      *remote-ssh-requirements*

Both local and remote systems must meet certain requirements:

Local (Host):
- `ssh` (OpenSSH 4.0+) installed and accessible in `$PATH`.
- Multiplexing support (`ControlMaster`). Note: Win32-OpenSSH does not

>   support multiplexing, so Windows hosts are not supported currently.

Reviewer: ~~"host" means client or server?~~

how does it work in vscode?

ref: https://github.com/PowerShell/Win32-OpenSSH/issues/1328

Author: *Host* here means the local client machine (the one running `:connect`). I'll clarify the wording here

Author: > ~"host" means client or server?~
> 
> how does it work in vscode?
> 
> ref: [PowerShell/Win32-OpenSSH#1328](https://github.com/PowerShell/Win32-OpenSSH/issues/1328)

VSCode also doesnt support ControlMaster (https://github.com/microsoft/vscode-remote-release/issues/96), they open separate SSH connections instead of multiplexing. We could take a similar approach in the future, but I think it's out of scope for this PR. But I could try figure something out.

Reviewer: ok, would be very welcome if you can  open a tracking issue for that. whenever we discover TODOs like this.

Author: https://github.com/neovim/neovim/issues/39637

- `/tmp` directory must be writable.

Remote (Target):
- Linux (x86_64, aarch64) or macOS (arm64, x86_64).
- `tar`, `curl` or `wget` to extract the Nvim release.
- A POSIX-compliant shell.

==============================================================================
4. Remote Environment                                     *remote-ssh-configs*

The remote Nvim starts with `NVIM_APPNAME=nvim-remote`, which isolates its
configuration and data directories from any existing Nvim installation on
the remote host. See |$NVIM_APPNAME|.

Remote paths used:
  - Config: `~/.config/nvim-remote/`
  - Data:   `~/.local/share/nvim-remote/`
  - Binary: `~/.local/bin/nvim`

The data directory persists across connections for fast reconnects. On
teardown, only the headless process and SSH mux socket are cleaned up.

==============================================================================
5. Lua API                                               *remote-ssh-lua-api*

>                                             *vim.net._remote.start()* *E6101*

Reviewer: these are private (underscore) apis, why are we generating docs for them?

Author: Yup, good point. I'll remove the Lua API section. The `E6101` tag can move to the Requirements or Introduction section instead.

passing the |--remote-ssh| flag or using the |:RemoteSSH| command, Nvim will
automatically connect to a host, bootstrap itself, synchronize your local
configuration, and connect the local UI to the remote headless server.

                                      Type |gO| to see the table of contents.

==============================================================================
1. Introduction                                      *remote-ssh-introduction*

The remote SSH engine uses `ssh` to communicate with the remote system. It:
- Detects the remote architecture.
- Bootstraps the Neovim binary in `~/.local/bin/nvim` and `~/.local/share/nvim-remote`.
- Synchronizes your local `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/nvim` to the remote host.
- Initiates a headless Neovim server and connects your local UI via a Unix
  domain socket.

==============================================================================
2. Usage                                                    *remote-ssh-usage*

From the command line: ~

Connect to a remote server by passing the target host. Nvim will prompt for
a password if needed, but SSH keys are highly recommended.
>sh
    nvim --remote-ssh user@192.168.1.100

>     nvim --remote-ssh ssh://root@server:2222

Reviewer: Just some early feedback: `:connect ssh://...` should work, and therefore a ` --remote-ssh` cli arg shouldn't be needed (nor wanted: generally we want to guide users to a single interface, and the `:` cmdline is the interface, while a few limited CLI args expose that interface from CLI).

Users that want to do stuff via cli can do:

    nvim -c 'connect ssh://root@server:2222'

and users that are already in an interactive session can do:

    :connect ssh://root@server:2222

Note that `:connect /path/to/socket` already works, but I think `:connect ssh://` isn't fully baked yet (which is something this PR could do).

    nvim --remote-ssh myalias
<

From a running Neovim session: ~
                                                                  *:RemoteSSH*

`:RemoteSSH` [{uri}]

Without arguments, `:RemoteSSH` presents a list of hosts discovered from
`~/.ssh/config` using |vim.ui.select()|. Select a host from the list to
connect.

With an argument, `:RemoteSSH` connects directly to the specified URI:
>vim

>     :RemoteSSH user@192.168.1.100

Reviewer: `:connect` is intended for this (though it's not fully implemented, so this PR could do that), why do we need `:RemoteSSH` ?
